# 1. Introduction

## 1.1: Project Scope
The NA62 experiment at CERN (European organization for nuclear research) studies the rate of the ultra-rare meson decay into a pion to verify the Standard Model in physics {cite}`Gil_2017`. However, a muon or a positron may also be produced, and therefore the decays that produce pions need to be distinguished.

 "*RICH AI*", initiated by TRIUMF (Canada's national particle accelerator center), is aimed at improving Particle Identification (PID) performance of the Ring Imaging Cherenkov (RICH) {cite}`https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1706.08496` by developing a binary classification model based on advanced Machine Learning (ML). The classification will be based on the fundamental difference in the ring radius of light generated by the pion and muon particles at a specific momentum {ref}`App. A.1 <appendix:intro:pvsrr>`. The positron can be identified thouugh experimental procedures and therefore multi-nomial classification is unncessary. 

## 1.2 : Metrics 
The main challenge in this project is to increase pion efficiency, that is, the fraction of the matched detected pions out of the total number of pion producing events. Concurrently the muon efficiency needs to be minimized, which translates to minimizing the number of muons that are misclassified as pions out of the total muon events. These metrics will be compared to the output of the current method used for classification, the Maximum Likelihood Estimation, for events with momentum in the range of 15-45 $GeV/c$ {ref}`App. A.2 <appendix:intro:MLE>`.

## 1.3 : Output
Ultimately, the output of the project is a repository containing fully modularized code for the classification. The scientists are able to  select the dataset and hyperparameters, run the classification in the backend, and view the results along with the evaluation metrics as the output. 
