# 1. Introduction

## 1.1: Background

The NA62 experiment at CERN (European organization for nuclear research) studies the rate of the ultra-rare meson decay into a pion particle to verify the Standard Model in physics. {cite}`Gil_2017`. However, a muon particle or a positron particle may also be produced during a decay event, and therefore the events that produce pions need to be distinguished.

 *RICH AI*, initiated by TRIUMF (Canada's national particle accelerator center), is a project aimed at improving the Particle Identification ("PID") performance of the Ring Imaging Cherenkov ("RICH") {cite}`https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1706.08496` detector by developing a binary classification model that uses advanced Machine Learning ("ML") techniques. The classification will be based on the fundamental difference in the ring radius of light generated by the pion and muon particles at a specific momentum {ref}`App. A.1 <appendix:intro:pvsrr>`. The positron particle can already be identified through other experimental procedures and therefore positrons were not included in the training data for the model, and the final model is a binary classification model for pion and muon particle decays.

## 1.2: Scope and challenges

The challenge of the project lies in concurrently *increasing* the "pion efficiency" (the rate at which pion decays are correctly classified) while also *decreasing* the muon efficiency (the rate at which muon decays are incorrectly classified as pion decays).  These efficiency metrics will be compared to the performance of CERN's current algorithm, which is a simple maximum likelihood estimation that fits a circle to the photon light hits emitted when a particle decay, and uses the size of the fitted radius to classify the particle {cite}`na622020investigation`.  The models will be built for decay events for particles with a momentum in the range of 15-45 *GeV/c* {ref}`App. A.2 <appendix:intro:MLE>`.  In simpler terms, the goal of our machine learning models is to more accurately identify pions as pions, and misclassify fewer muons as pions compared to CERN's current algorithm.

## 1.3: Output

Ultimately, the output of the RICH AI project will be a GitHub repository that contains a fully modularized deep learning pipeline. This will allow the scientists at TRIUMF to select a dataset and training hyperparameters, run and train the models, and finally evaluate the model and view the model predictions.
